Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
My name is Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
This podcast is separate
from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring you zero cost to consumer information
about science and science-related tools.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Headspace.
Headspace is a meditation app that makes meditation easy.
I've been meditating on and off now for about 30 years,
although I confess more off than on.
And that's because I think like for a lot of people,
sticking to a meditation practice can be pretty challenging.
I started using Headspace a few years ago,
and I found that it's really allowed me
to stick to a meditation practice on a regular basis.
I meditate anywhere from five to seven times a week.
The app includes meditations that are all backed
by scientific peer-reviewed studies,
and it makes it really easy to start
and complete the meditations.
I started using these meditations
while I was flying a few years back.
On JetBlue flights,
they started offering Headspace meditation,
so that's where I initially started,
and then I moved over to the app, and I really enjoy it,
and I derive great benefit from it.
If you'd like to try Headspace,
you can go to headspace.com slash special offer,
and if you do that, you'll get all the meditations
that Headspace offers for free for one month.
That's headspace.com slash special offer.
You get all the meditations for free,
which is the best offer that Headspace has
available right now,
so if you're interested in it, check it out.
The second sponsor of today's podcast is Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink.
I started using Athletic Greens in 2012,
and I've been using it continuously ever since.
I started using Athletic Greens
because I found it rather dizzying to know
which vitamins and minerals to take,
and Athletic Greens allows me to get
the full base of all the necessary vitamins and minerals
in one easy-to-consume drink.
It also turns out that the drink tastes quite good.
I mix mine with some lemon juice and some water.
I'll drink it once or twice a day.
The probiotics in Athletic Greens are also important to me
because there are a lot of data now
supporting the fact that the gut microbiome
is important for the gut-brain axis,
for various aspects of cognitive function, immune function,
metabolic function.
There's just a huge number of things
that having a healthy gut microbiome
has been shown to be important for,
so by taking Athletic Greens,
I have that base covered as well.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman,
and if you do that, they'll give you a year's supply
of liquid vitamin D3K2.
There are also a lot of data now showing
that vitamin D3 is very important
for a number of different biological functions.
In addition, they'll give you five free travel packs
with your order.
It can be difficult to mix up powders while on the road,
you know, when in a car or, you know,
in a hotel or on a plane, et cetera.
The travel packs make everything really clean and easy,
so you'll get the year supply of vitamin D3K2
plus the five free travel packs
if you go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman.
The third sponsor of today's podcast is Made For.
Made For is a behavioral science company
that makes learning positive habits and growth mindset easy.
I've been involved with Made For since the beginning
as the lead of their scientific advisory.
Other members of the scientific advisory include,
for instance, the head of the Chronobiology Unit
at the National Institutes of Mental Health,
as well as psychiatrists from Harvard Medical School
and elsewhere, all of whom are serious about science
and science-related tools for developing positive habits
and growth mindset.
The program is a 10-month program
during which each month you engage in a specific activity
designed to encourage and cultivate
positive habits and growth mindset.
As well, we hold a monthly Zoom call
during which we discuss the program,
people's progress, and answer any questions
they have directly.
If you'd like to try Made For,
you can go to getmadefor.com,
and if you put Huberman in at checkout,
you'll get 20% off the program.
That's getmadefor.com.
Put Huberman in at checkout and get 20% off the program.
Today, we're going to talk about
how to change your nervous system for the better.
As you recall, your nervous system
includes your brain and your spinal cord,
but also all the connections that your brain
and spinal cord make with the organs of your body
and all the connections that the organs of your body
make with your brain and spinal cord.
This thing that we call the nervous system
is responsible for everything we know,
all our behavior, all our emotions,
everything we feel about ourselves and the outside world,
everything we think and believe, it's really at the center
of our entire experience of life and who we are.
Fortunately, in humans, unlike in other species,
we can change our nervous system
by taking some very specific and deliberate actions.
And today, we're really going to focus on the actions,
the motor commands and the aspects of movement and balance
that allow us to change our nervous system.
It turns out that movement and balance
actually provide windows or portals into our ability
to change our nervous system the way we want,
even if those changes are not about learning new movements
or learning how to balance, and soon you'll understand why.
So today, we're going to talk a lot
about the basic science of neuroplasticity.
I promise to not use excessive nomenclature,
there'll be a little bit,
but I'll try and make it as clear as possible.
And we're also going to talk a lot about protocols and tools
that the scientific literature points to and supports
for changing our nervous system.
Again, not just for sake of learning new motor movements
or how to balance better, but for how to feel differently
about particular experiences, both past, present and future,
as well as how to learn faster.
We're not going to discuss hacks, a word I loathe,
we're not going to discuss gimmicks,
we're going to discuss mechanism and scientific data
and the tools that those mechanisms
and scientific data point to
so that you can tailor your practices around learning
to your specific needs and goals.
So let's begin by just examining the big picture question,
which is does the brain control behavior?
And my hope is that everyone is immediately thinking yes.
The brain and nervous system, we really should say,
because the brain is just one component of the nervous system
controls our behavior.
How does it do that?
Well, there are a couple of different levels
that it does that.
First of all, if we're talking about movement,
behavior generally means movement.
If we're talking about movement,
we have two categories of neurons that are very important
to think about in the context of neuroplasticity.
First of all, we have what are called lower motor neurons.
These are motor neurons that live in our spinal cord.
If for the aficionados out there,
for those of you that might be head to medical school
or just want to learn more about the anatomy,
they live in the ventral horn of the spinal cord,
but that doesn't matter.
If you don't want to know that,
just know that you have these things
called lower motor neurons.
These are neurons that are in the spinal cord,
but they extend a wire that we call an axon
out into the peripheral nervous system, into the body.
And those neurons connect with muscle.
They send electrical potentials out there
that allow our muscles to twitch and to contract.
As a little point of fact, actually,
we don't have muscle memory.
There's no such thing as muscle memory.
Muscles are dumb.
They don't know anything.
They don't have a history.
They don't have a memory.
They don't know anything.
It is the neurons that control those muscles
and their firing patterns in which all the information
for motor patterns are stored.
So your ability to walk is not muscle memory.
It's neural memory.
Now, the lower motor neurons,
while smarter than the muscle, so to speak,
are not the most brilliant of the motor neurons.
They are generally involved in doing what they are told.
And they are told what to do from two sources.
We have circuits in our brainstem.
So this would be kind of around your neck deep in the brain
that are called central pattern generators.
These are sometimes called CPGs.
Central pattern generators are what allow us
to generate repetitive patterns of movement.
So inhaling and exhaling, inhaling and exhaling,
subconsciously is controlled by a central pattern generator.
That just means a collection of neurons.
If you really want to know,
they're called the pre-bot singer neurons
discovered by Jack Feldman and colleagues at UCLA.
These neurons in the brainstem send information
down the phrenic nerve and control the diaphragm.
So it goes inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale.
And you don't have to think about that.
You could think about it,
and you could change the durations of inhales and exhales
and change that up.
But the motor neurons that control that
are just responding to what the brain is telling it to do.
The other central pattern generators
include things like walking.
The right limb, left limb, right limb, left limb pattern
that we normally associate with walking
was learned during childhood.
And the central pattern generator, sometimes called CPGs,
tell our lower motor neurons fire.
Now you fire, now you fire.
So they are literally saying right, left, right, left.
They are the marching orders from the brainstem
to the lower motor neurons.
So these lower motor neurons do what they are told.
They are obedient little soldiers
and they do what they are told.
And their job is to make the muscles
contract at specific times.
Okay, that's all simple.
But then there are the upper motor neurons.
The upper motor neurons actually reside in our motor cortex
way up on top of the brain.
And they are involved in sending signals
for deliberate action.
Okay, so they send signals to the lower motor neurons
which are the effectors,
the ones that actually control the muscles,
but the upper motor neurons are the ones
that send very specific signals.
For instance, the signals that would allow you
to make a cup of coffee in the morning
or to deliberately engage in any kind of behavior.
Now you can probably make a cup of coffee in the morning
without having to think about it too much.
It's almost reflexive for you now,
which means that a lot of the information
about how to perform that particular movement
has been passed off to circuitry
that's now more or less in the brainstem
and below the motor cortex.
Now, why am I giving you all this detail?
Well, if you want to change motor patterns,
you have to know where in the circuitry changes are possible
and you ought to know where the changes
are most likely to occur.
You also need to know how do you signal
to the brain and nervous system that a change is necessary.
So let's just pause there,
return to the initial question that we started with,
which is does the brain control behavior?
And the answer is yes, and now you know how.
It's upper motor neurons, lower motor neurons.
You've got these things called central pattern generators
and some connection with the muscle.
So there you go.
So we've just got basically what was the equivalent
of the introduction to a college lecture
on motor control in the nervous system,
but the point today is all about plasticity.
How can that be leveraged in order to open up
this magical thing that we call plasticity
in order to access changes to our emotional experience
or to our belief system or to our ability to remember
and use specific kinds of information
for say math or language, et cetera?
Well, what I'm not going to tell you
is that you need to go running or you need to go biking
or that simply going through motor patterns
is going to open up plasticity,
because I hate to tell you this,
but as beneficial as exercise is,
it does not open plasticity unless you do certain things.
And I will tell you exactly
what those certain things are today.
To be clear, I think exercise is wonderful and healthy,
can improve cardiovascular function,
maintain strength, bone density, all that good stuff,
but just working out or doing your exercise
of various kinds will not change your nervous system.
It will maintain it
and it can certainly improve other health metrics,
but it is not going to open up the window for plasticity.
The question we need to ask
is can behavior change the brain?
We already agreed that the brain can change behavior,
but can behavior change the brain?
And the answer is yes,
provided that behavior is different enough in specific ways
from the behaviors that you already know how to perform.
Let me repeat that.
Can behavior change the brain?
And the answer is yes,
provided that behavior is different enough
from the sorts of behaviors
that you already know how to perform.
And I should have added the word well,
because you can't obviously perform a behavior
that you don't know how to perform
because you don't know how to do it yet.
But there's a key element to accessing neuroplasticity
that frankly, I don't see out there
in the general discussion about neuroplasticity.
In the general discussion about neuroplasticity
and about learning, I hear all these gimmicks
about using different ways to remember
lots of people's names
and arranging things into their first letters
and mnemonics and all this kind of stuff,
which frankly to me feels really gimmicky.
And I think that if you look at super learners,
they tend to be people that have a process
of say extreme memory,
but people who have extreme memory,
generally the literature shows us
are pretty poor at other things.
So I don't think most of us are interested
in walking around knowing how to remember everything.
In fact, there are some interesting studies
looking at humans who over-remember
and they suffer tremendously
because they remember all sorts of things
like the number at the top of the receipt at the bodega
that they bought at Coca-Cola 10 years ago.
This is useless information for most people.
They don't do well in life really.
So the goal isn't to remember everything,
the goal is to be selective about your brain changes.
And when we talk about brain changes,
I want to highlight adaptive changes.
There's a whole category of things
that we're going to discuss
when we talk about traumatic brain injury and dementia,
a topic for a future episode,
about all the things that happen when you have damaged
your nervous system or you're missing neurons.
But today I really want to talk about something
that I think is very near and dear to many of your hearts,
which is what are the behaviors that you can engage in
to access neuroplasticity
so that then you can apply that plasticity
to the specific things that you want to learn or unlearn.
This is very important because I don't want people
to get the impression that we're really talking
about learning a bunch of motor movements.
You may be an athlete, you might not be an athlete.
You might want to learn how to dance, you might not.
You might want to learn how to dance
and get better at remembering and learning languages,
for instance, or at unlearning
some difficult emotional experience,
meaning you want to remove the emotional load
from a particular memory of an experience.
What we're talking about today is using behavior
as a gate to enter states of mind and body
that allow you to access plasticity.
So let's talk about the different kinds of plasticity
that are available to us,
because those will point directly
towards the type of protocols that we should engage in
to change ourselves for the better,
the so-called adaptive plasticity.
There is something called representational plasticity.
Representational plasticity
is just your internal representation of the outside world.
So you have a map of auditory space, believe it or not,
meaning you have neurons that respond
when something over on my right happens,
like I'm snapping my fingers over to my right,
can't snap as well on my left,
which is the whole thing into itself.
Yeah, weak over there on the left side.
But when I do that,
there are different neurons respond to those.
We have a map of visual space.
Certain neurons are seeing things
in certain portions of visual space and not others.
We have a map of motor space,
meaning when we move our limbs in particular directions,
we know where those limbs are,
because even if we can't see them,
we have what's called proprioceptive feedback.
So we have knowledge about where our limbs are.
In fact, people that lack certain neurons
for proprioceptive feedback,
they are very poor at controlling their motor behavior.
They get injured a lot.
It's actually a terrible situation.
So we've got all these representations inside,
and we have maps of our motor commands.
We know that, for instance,
if I want to reach out and grab the pen in front of me,
that I need to generate a certain amount of force,
so I rarely overshoot.
I rarely miss the pen, okay?
So our maps of the motor world
and our maps of the sensory world are merged.
The way to create plasticity
is to create mismatches or errors in how we perform things.
And this, I think, is an amazing and important feature
of neuroplasticity that is highly underappreciated.
The way to create plasticity
is to send signals to the brain that something is wrong,
something is different, and something isn't being achieved.
I think this will completely reframe
the way that most people think about plasticity.
Most of us think about plasticity as,
okay, we're going to get into this optimal learning state
or flow, and then suddenly we're going to be able
to do all the things that we wish that we could do.
Well, I hate to break it to you,
but flow is an expression of what we already know how to do.
It is not a state for learning.
And I'm willing to go to bat
with any of the flow anistas out there
that want to challenge me on that one.
Flow is an expression of nervous system capabilities
that are already embedded in us.
Errors and making errors out of sync
with what we would like to do
is how our nervous system is cued
through very distinct biological mechanisms
that something isn't going right,
and therefore certain neurochemicals are deployed
that'll signal the neural circuits that they have to change.
So let's talk about the experiments
that support what I just said,
because I'm about to tell you that making errors
over and over and over again
is the route to shaping your nervous system
so that it performs better and better and better.
And I'm not going to tell you that the last rep of a set
where you hit failure in the gym
is anything like neuroplasticity.
You hear that too, that it's pushing to that point
of a cliff where you just can't function anymore.
That's the signal, that's not the signal.
That's a distinct neuromuscular phenomenon
that bears zero resemblance
to what it takes to get neuroplasticity.
So let's talk about errors and making errors
and why and how that triggers the release of chemicals
that then allow us to not just learn the thing
that we're doing in the motor sense,
play the piano, dance, et cetera,
but it also creates an environment to milieu within the brain
that allows us to then go learn how to couple
or uncouple a particular emotion to an experience
or better language learning or better mathematical learning.
It's a really fundamental aspect of how we're built.
And when you look at it,
it's actually very straightforward.
It's a series of logical steps
that once you learn how to open those hatches,
it becomes very straightforward to deploy.
Last episode, we discussed some of the basic principles
of neuroplasticity.
If you didn't hear that episode, no problem.
I'll just review it quickly,
which is that it's a falsehood that everything that we do
and experience changes our brain.
The brain changes when certain neurochemicals,
namely acetylcholine, epinephrine, and dopamine
are released in ways and in the specific times
that allow for neural circuits to be marked for change
and then the change occurs later during sleep.
I'll review that later,
but basically you need a certain cocktail of chemicals
released in the brain in order for a particular behavior
to reshape the way that our brain works.
So the question really is,
what allows those neurochemicals to be released?
And last episode, it talked all about focus.
If you haven't seen or heard that episode,
you might want to check it out
about some specific tools and practices
that can allow you to build up your capacity for focus
and release certain chemicals in that cocktail.
But today we're going to talk about the other chemicals
in the cocktail, in particular dopamine.
And we're really going to center our discussion
around this issue of making errors
and why making errors is actually the signal
that tells the brain, okay, it's time to change,
or more generally, it's time to pay attention to things
so that you change.
And I really want to distinguish this point really clearly,
which is that I'm going to talk today a lot about motor
and vestibular, meaning balance programs,
but not just for learning motor commands and balance,
not just for learning new motor skills and balance,
but also for setting a stage or a kind of condition
in your brain where you can go learn other things as well.
So let's talk about some classic experiments
that really nail down what's most important
in this discussion about plasticity.
So I mentioned last episode,
and I'll just tell you right now, again,
the brain is incredibly plastic from about birth
until about age 25.
Passive experience will shape the brain
just because of the way that the chemicals
that are sloshing around in there
and the way that the neurons are arranged
and all sorts of things.
The brain's job is to customize itself
in response to its experience.
And then somewhere about 25,
it's not like the day after your 26th birthday,
plasticity closes.
There's a kind of tapering off of plasticity,
and you need different mechanisms
to engage plasticity as an adult.
We're mostly going to be talking about adult plasticity today
but I got a lot of questions about,
well, what about if I'm younger than 25?
Well, first of all, that's great.
I wish I had a time machine, but I don't.
Because as I've said before,
the stinger is when you're young,
your brain is very plastic,
but you have less control over your experience.
When you're older,
generally you have more control over your experience,
but your brain is less plastic.
So if you're already asking the question
as a 20-year-old or a 15-year-old,
what can I do now that's really gonna enhance my brain?
I guess the simple question would answer,
excuse me, would be an aside
which we get the broadest education you can possible.
That means math, chemistry, physics, literature, music,
learn how to play an instrument.
I'm saying that because I wish I had, et cetera.
Get a broad training in a number of things
and find the thing that really captures your passion
and excitement and then put a ton of additional effort there.
That's what I recommend, including emotional development.
Maybe a topic for a future episode.
But if you are an adult or if you are a young person,
knowing how to tap into these plasticity mechanisms
is very powerful.
You need these chemicals deployed in the nervous system
in order to mark whatever nerve cells happen to be firing
in the time afterward for change.
And people are obsessed with asking,
what supplements, what drugs, what conditions,
what machines will allow for that?
But there's a natural set of conditions that allow for that.
When we came into this world,
we learned to take our different maps of experience,
our motor maps, our auditory maps, our visual maps,
and to link them, we align those maps.
The simplest example is the one I gave before.
If I hear something off to my right, like a click,
like that, it could come from my finger snapping
or it could come from something generated by somebody else
or something else to my right, I look to my right.
If I hear it on the left, I look to my left.
If I hear it right in front of me,
I keep looking right in front of me.
And if I hear it behind me, I turn around.
And that's because our maps of visual space
and our maps of auditory space and our maps of motor space
are aligned to one another in perfect register.
It's an incredible feature of our nervous system.
It takes place in a structure called the superior colliculus,
although you don't need to know that name.
Superior colliculus has layers,
literally stacks of neurons like in a sandwich
where the zero point right in front of me,
or maybe 10 or 15 degrees off to my right
or 10 or 15 degrees off to my left
are aligned so that the auditory neurons,
the ones that care about sounds at 15 degrees to my right,
sit directly below the neurons that look at 15 degrees
to my right in my visual system.
And when I reach over to this direction,
there's a signal that's sent down through those layers
that says 15 degrees off to the right
is the direction to look, it's the direction to listen,
and it's the direction to move if I need to move.
So there's an alignment, and this is really powerful.
And this is what allows us to move through space
and function in our lives in a really fluid way.
It's set up during development,
but there have been some important experiments
that have revealed that these maps are plastic,
meaning they can shift, they're subject to neuroplasticity,
and there are specific rules that allow us to shift them.
So here's the key experiment.
The key experiment was done by a colleague of mine,
who's now retired, but whose work is absolutely fundamental
in the field of neuroplasticity, Eric Knudsen.
The Knudsen lab and many of the Knudsen lab
scientific offspring showed that if one
is to wear prism glasses that shift the visual field,
that eventually there'll be a shift
in the representation of the auditory and motor maps too.
Now, what they initially did
is they looked at young subjects,
and what they did is they moved the visual world
by making them wear prism glasses,
so that for instance, if my pen is out in front of me
at five degrees off center,
so just a little bit off center,
if you're listening to this,
this would be like just a little bit to my right,
but in these prism glasses,
I actually see that pen way over far on my right,
so it's actually here, but I see it over there
because I'm wearing prisms on my eyes.
What happens is in the first day or so,
you ask people or you ask animal subjects or whatever
to reach for this object,
and they reach to the wrong place
because they're seeing it where it isn't.
This gets especially complicated
when you start including sounds,
when you have a thing off to your right making a sound,
but the thing is actually right here,
so you're hearing the sound at one location
and you're seeing the object at another location
because you're wearing these prisms,
so your image of the world is totally distorted.
Or in experiments done by other groups,
they wear glasses, subjects wear glasses
that completely invert the visual world
so that everything is upside down,
which is an extreme example of these representational maps
being flipped or shifted.
But what you find is that in young individuals,
within a day or two,
they start adjusting their motor behavior
in exactly the right way
so that they always reach to the correct location.
So they hear a sound at one location,
they see the object that ought to make that sound
at a different location,
and they somehow are able to adjust their motor behavior
to reach to the correct location.
It's incredible, it's absolutely incredible.
Or in the case of the people
who look at the world upside down,
they somehow are able to navigate this upside down world
even though we're completely used to
our feet being on the floor and not on the ceiling
and people not walking at us
by hanging off the ceiling like bats, amazing.
And what it tells us is that these maps
that are aligned to one another
can move and shift and rotate and even flip themselves.
And it happens best in young individuals.
If you do this in older individuals,
in most cases it takes a very long time
for the maps to shift and in some cases they never shift.
So this is a very experimental scenario
but it's an important one to understand
because it really tamps down the fact
that we have the capacity to create dramatic shifts
in our representation of the outside world.
So how can we get plasticity as adult
that mimics the plasticity that we get when we are juveniles?
Well, the Knudsen lab and other labs have looked at this
and it's really interesting.
First of all, we have to ask
what is the signal for plasticity?
Is it just having prism glasses on?
No, because they did that experiment and ruled that out.
Is it just the fact that the visual thing is over to my,
appears to be far over to my right
when in fact it's right in front of me?
No, the signal that generates the plasticity
is the making of errors.
It's the reaches and failures
that signal to the nervous system that this is not working
and therefore the shifts start to take place.
And this is so fundamentally important
because I think most people think,
oh, well, practice is gonna be,
I have to access beginner's mind,
which is a great concept actually.
It's about approaching things, expecting to make errors,
which is great.
I think I am a believer in beginner's mind,
but people understandably get frustrated.
Like they're trying to learn a piece on the piano
and they don't know, they can't do it
or they're trying to write a piece of code
or they're trying to access some sort of motor behavior
and they can't do it.
And the frustration drives them crazy.
And like, I can't do it, I can't do it.
When they don't realize that the errors themselves
are signaling to the brain and nervous system,
something's not working.
And of course the brain doesn't understand the words,
something isn't working.
The brain doesn't even understand frustration
as an emotional state.
The brain understands the neurochemicals that are released,
namely epinephrine and acetylcholine,
but also, and we'll get into this, the molecule dopamine,
when we start to approximate the correct behavior
just a little bit and we start getting a little bit right.
So what happens is when we make errors,
the nervous system kind of, I don't wanna say freaks out
because it's a very mechanistic and controlled situation,
but the nervous system starts releasing neurotransmitters
and neuromodulators that say,
we better change something in the circuitry.
And so errors are the basis for neuroplasticity
and for learning.
And I wish that this was more prominent out there.
I guess this is why I'm saying it.
And humans do not like this feeling of frustration
and making errors.
The few that do, do exceedingly well in whatever pursuits
they happen to be involved in.
The ones that don't generally don't do well.
They generally don't learn much.
And if you think about it,
why would your nervous system ever change?
Why would it ever change?
Unless there was something to be afraid of,
something that made us feel awful will signal
that the nervous system needs to change,
or there's an error in our performance.
So it turns out that the feedback of these errors,
the reaching to the wrong location
starts to release a number of things.
And now you've heard about them many times,
but this would be epinephrine, it increases alertness,
acetylcholine focus.
And this is why frustration that leads us
to just kind of quit and walk away from the endeavor
is the absolute worst thing.
But because if acetylcholine is released,
it creates an opportunity to focus on the error margin,
the distance between what it is that you're doing
and what it is that you would like to do.
And then the nervous system starts to make changes
almost immediately in order to try
and get the behavior right.
And when you start getting it even a little bit right,
that third molecule comes online or is released,
which is dopamine,
which allows for the plastic changes to occur very fast.
Now, this is what all happens very naturally
in young brains, but in old brains,
it tends to be pretty slow except for in two conditions.
So let me just pause and just say this.
If you are uncomfortable making errors
and you get frustrated easily,
if you leverage that frustration
toward drilling deeper into the endeavor,
you are setting yourself up
for a terrific set of plasticity mechanisms to engage.
But if you take that frustration
and you walk away from the endeavor,
you are essentially setting up plasticity
to rewire you according to what happens afterwards,
which is generally feeling pretty miserable.
So now you can kind of start to appreciate why it is
that continuing to drill into a process
to the point of frustration,
but then staying with that process for a little bit longer,
and I'll define exactly what I mean by a little bit,
is the most important thing for adult learning,
as well as childhood learning,
but adult learning in particular.
Now, the Newton Lab did two very important
sets of experiments.
The first one was published in Nature,
very important study,
which showed that juveniles can make these massive shifts
in their map representations,
meaning you can shift the visual world using visual prisms
a huge amount,
and very quickly young individuals
can shift their representations of the world
so that they learn to reach to the correct location.
They get a lot of plasticity all at once,
and it happens very fast
in the period of just a couple of days.
In adults, it tends to be very slow,
and most individuals never actually accomplish
the full map shift.
They don't get the plasticity.
And here, we're talking about map shifts,
but this could be learning a new language.
This could be any number of different things
that one were attempting.
So what we're saying is what I already said before,
which is that we learn very well as youngsters,
but not as adults after 25.
But then what they did
is they started making the increment of change smaller.
So instead of shifting the world a huge amount
by putting prisms that shifted the visual world
all the way over to the right,
they did this incrementally.
So first, they put on prisms
that shifted it just a little bit,
just like seven degrees, I believe was the exact number.
And then it was 14 degrees, and then it was 28 degrees.
And so what they found was that the adult nervous system
can tolerate smaller and smaller errors over time,
but that you can stack those errors
so that you can get a lot of plasticity.
Put simply, incremental learning as an adult
is absolutely essential.
You are not gonna get massive shifts
in your representations of the outside world.
So how do you make small errors as opposed to big errors?
Well, the key is smaller bouts of focused learning
for smaller bits of information.
It's a mistake to try and learn a lot of information
in one learning bout as an adult.
What these papers from the Knudsen Lab show
and what others have gone on to show
is that the adult nervous system is fully capable
of engaging in a huge amount of plasticity,
but you need to do it in smaller increments
per learning epoch or per learning episode.
So how would you do this?
Well, let's say, for instance, I'm terrible at free throws.
So let's say I wanted to learn free throws.
I'm 45 years old, so I'm well past the 25 and under mark.
I'm gonna make errors, I'm gonna make a lot of errors.
If I go into learning free throws,
knowing that errors are the gate to plasticity,
well, then I feel a little bit better,
but I still have to aim for the rim of the basket
or the net, basically showing how little
I know about basketball.
But I think I know the general themes around basketball.
It involves a net, a backboard, and a ball, of course.
So I go to the free throw line and I'll throw.
How long should I go?
Well, until I'm hitting the point of frustration,
and at that point, continuing probably for anywhere
from 10 to 100 more trials should be my limit, right?
That should be my limit if I want to improve
some specific aspect of the motor behavior.
And so the question then is,
what should I be paying attention to?
What should I be focusing on?
Well, obviously trying to get the ball into the basket,
but the beauty of motor learning is that the circuits
for auditory and visual and motor
more or less teach themselves.
I don't necessarily have to be paying attention
to exactly what the contact of my fingers with the ball
or some random feature,
like whether or not I'm bending my knees or not.
The key is to try a number of different parameters
until I start to approximate the behavior
that I want to get a little bit better
and then trying to get consistent about that.
Now, many of you involved in sports learning will say,
okay, well, that's obvious, it's just incremental learning.
But the key thing is in those errors.
By isolating the errors and making a number of errors
in a particular aspect of the motor movement,
it signals to the brain that it's plastic.
And if I leave that episode of going
and trying to learn how to shoot free throws,
my brain is still plastic.
Plasticity is a state of the brain and nervous system.
It's not just geared toward the specific thing
I'm trying to learn.
So there are two aspects to plasticity
that I think we really need to highlight.
One is that there's plasticity geared toward the thing
that you are trying to learn specifically.
And then there are states of mind and body
that allow us to access plasticity.
Now, toward the end of this episode,
I'm going to spell out specific protocols
in a little more detail.
That free throw example might not correlate
with what you want to learn.
Actually, I don't have a huge desire to learn free throws.
I've more or less given up on basketball
and free throws in particular.
But I think that it's important to understand
that motor movements are the most straightforward way
to access states of plasticity.
And that can be for sake of learning the motor movement
or for sake of accessing plasticity more generally.
One very important aspect to getting plasticity as an adult
is not just smaller increments, meaning shorter bouts.
So I gave an example of another 100 free throws or something
but going out there and just getting my 10,000 free throws
all at once or packing as much as I can into one episode
is not going to be as efficient for me
as shorter bouts of intense learning as an adult.
Because the error signals are not as well defined.
To my nervous system,
it's not going to know what needs to change.
And so this is really the key element
of incremental learning,
is that you're trying to signal to the nervous system
at least one component that needs to change.
The nervous system needs to know what the error is.
Now, when I shoot free throws, Lord knows,
there are a lot of different kinds of errors that happen.
Probably the way I'm bending my knees, the arc of the ball,
the way I'm organizing my shoulder
is probably where my eyes are, lots of things.
So which ones to focus on.
And that's what I said before,
the beauty of the motor system is
I don't have to worry about all of that.
I just need to get the reps in a number of times
and the nervous system will figure out
how far off my motor commands are
at the level of these maps that I described earlier,
how far those deviate from the desired behavior,
getting the ball into the basket.
And it will start making adjustments.
But as I make adjustments,
or as my nervous system makes adjustments for me,
the key thing is to not start adding a variety of new errors
because then it gets confused.
And so this is why short learning bouts
are absolutely essential.
So let's say it's for learning an instrument as an adult,
probably anywhere from seven minutes to 30 minutes
provided that you're fully attending, you're very focused,
is going to be a pretty significant stimulus
to inspire plasticity in the nervous system.
Now, there is one way to get a lot of plasticity
all at once as an adult.
There is that kind of holy grail thing
of getting massive plasticity
as you would when you were a young person, but as an adult.
And the Knudsen lab revealed this
by setting a very serious contingency on the learning.
What they did was they had a situation
where subjects had to find food
that was displaced in their visual world,
again, by putting prisms,
and they had to find the food and the food made a noise.
There was a noise set kind of the location of the food
through an array of speakers.
Basically, what they found was that
if people have to adjust their visual world
in order to get food, the plasticity would eventually occur,
but it was very slow as an adult.
It was very, very slow.
Unless they actually had to hunt that food.
They actually, in order to eat at all,
they needed plasticity.
And then what happened was remarkable.
What they observed is that the plasticity as an adult
can be as dramatic, as robust as it is in a young person
or in a young animal subject,
provided that there's a serious incentive
for the plasticity to occur.
And this is absolutely important to understand,
which is that how badly we need or want the plasticity
determines how fast that plasticity will arrive,
which is incredible because the brain is just neurons
and soup of chemicals.
So with this, but this means that the importance of something
how important something is to us
actually gates the rate of plasticity
and the magnitude of plasticity.
And this is why just passively going through most things,
going through the motions, as we say,
or just getting our reps in quote unquote
is not sufficient to get the nervous system to change.
This study, a beautiful study
published in the Journal of Neuroscience shows
that if we actually have to accomplish something
in order to eat or in order to get our ration of income,
we will reshape our nervous system very, very quickly.
So the nervous system has a capacity to change
at a tremendous rate to an enormous degree
at any stage of life,
provided it's important enough that that happened.
And I think some of you might be saying,
well, duh, that's obvious.
If it's really crucial,
then of course it's gonna change faster,
but it didn't have to be that way.
And for most people who are trying to learn
how to learn faster or learn better,
they probably, in most cases,
they are hitting a limit
because the need to change is not crucial enough.
And I think there are a number of places
where this has an important relevance
in the people who are battling addiction, for instance.
I will be the first to say that I sympathize with the fact
that addictions have a biological component.
There's clearly cases where people struggle tremendously
to change their behavior and their nervous system,
in some cases, is so disrupted
by whatever substance they've been abusing
or behavior that they've been engaging in
that it's that much harder for them to change.
But we've also seen incredible examples
where when people have to change from an internal standpoint
from their own belief and desire to change,
that massive change is possible.
And so I think that the studies that Knudsen did
showing that incremental learning
can create a huge degree of plasticity as an adult,
as well as when the contingency is very high,
meaning we need to eat or we need to make an income
or we need to do something that's vitally important for us,
that plasticity can happen in these enormous leaps
just like they can in adolescence and young adulthood.
That points to the fact
that it has to be a neurochemical system.
There has to be an underlying mechanism, right?
This wasn't a case of sticking a wire into the brain
or taking a particular drug.
All the chemicals that we're about to talk about
are released from drug stores, if you will,
chemical stores that already reside in all of our brains.
And the key is how to tap into those stores.
And so we're going to next talk about
what are the specific behaviors
that liberate particular categories of chemicals
that allow us to make the most of incremental learning
and that set the stage for plasticity
that is similar enough
or mimics these high contingency states
like the need to get food
or really create a sense of internal urgency,
chemical urgency, if you will.
If you've heard previous episodes of this podcast,
you may have heard me talk about ultradian rhythms,
which are these 90 minute rhythms
that break up our 24 hour day.
They help break up our sleep into different cycles of sleep
like REM sleep and non-REM sleep.
And in waking states, they help us,
or I should say they break up our day in ways
that allow us to learn best
within 90 minute cycles, et cetera.
So some of you might be saying,
wait, you've been talking about ultradian cycles
and a moment ago you were talking about
seven minute or 12 minute or 30 minute learning cycles.
Today we're really talking about
how to tap into plasticity
through the completion of a task
or working towards something repetitively and making errors.
And so just to frame this
in the context of the ultradian cycle,
you might sit down,
decide that you're going to learn a conversational French,
which would mean that you probably
don't already speak French.
So you're going to sit down,
you're going to decide,
you're going to learn some nouns and some verbs.
You might do some practice sets.
The ultradian cycle says that
for the first five to 10 minutes of doing that,
your mind is going to drift
and your focus will probably kick in
provided that you're restricting your visual world
to just the material in front of you,
something we talked about last episode,
somewhere around the 10 or 15 minute mark.
And then at best,
you're probably going to get about an hour
of deliberate kind of tunnel vision learning in there.
Your mind will drift.
And then toward the end of that,
what is now an hour and 10 or hour and 20 minute cycle,
you're going to,
your brain will start to flicker in and out.
You might start thinking about what you need to eat
or the fact that you have to use the bathroom or something.
And then by the 90 minutes,
it's probably time to just stop the learning bout
and go do something else,
maybe return for a second learning bout later,
but maybe take a nap afterwards
or something to enhance the learning,
but that it's going to happen within
about a 90 minute block,
you're going to go through that cycle of learning.
But when I refer to the seven or 12 or 30 minutes
of making errors,
what I mean is when you're really in a mode
of repeating errors, not deliberately,
you're trying your best to accomplish something
and you're failing.
You're absolutely failing.
You're trying to remember, say, the sign language alphabet.
I was trying to teach myself this recently,
and then I keep repeating and repeating,
and then you get to a certain point
where I kept making errors,
making errors, making errors.
You want to keep making errors for this period of time
that I'm saying will last anywhere
for about seven to 30 minutes.
It is exceedingly frustrating,
but that frustration, it liberates the chemical cues
that signal that plasticity needs to happen.
And they also signal the particular neurons that are active.
So in the case of sign language,
it might be the ones that control my hand movements
as well as me thinking about what the different letters are.
It's signaling different components within the networks
of between the brain and body.
And it's trying to figure out,
wait, where are these errors coming from?
Where are the errors coming from?
Ah, it's those neurons.
They're making the mistakes.
And it essentially highlights that pathway for change.
And it is the case that when we come back a day or two later
in a learning bout after a nap or a night or two
of deep rest, then what we find is that
we can remember certain things and the motor pathways work.
And we don't always get it perfectly,
but we get a lot of it right whereas we got it wrong before.
So that seven to 30 minute intense learning bout
is within the ultradian cycle.
And I want to be clear about that.
And some people can tolerate many of these per day.
Most people can only tolerate one or two, maybe three.
This is intense work.
If, you know, shooting free throws,
you could probably do it all day.
But what I'm talking about is really trying
to accelerate plasticity by having a period
of the seven to 30 minutes per learning bout
that is specifically about making errors.
I want to really underscore that.
And it's not about, as I mentioned before,
coming up with some little hack or trick
or something of that sort.
It's really about trying to cue the nervous system
that something needs to change
because otherwise it simply won't change.
Now, there's another aspect to learning.
I think it's only fair to mention,
which is that we can all learn very easily
when there's something very bad happens to us.
And I don't wish this on anyone,
but it is the case that if something really terrible happens
that we will have a lifetime memory for that event.
There are processes that allow us to uncouple
the emotional load of that event.
I talked about some of those a few episodes back,
the episode on dreams, trauma, and hallucinations.
And we're going to return to trauma release, PTSD,
and some of those other themes in a future episode.
But the reason why negative experiences
can be wired into us so quickly
is because our nervous system's main job is to keep us safe.
But at a deeper level, it's because negative experiences
cue us to the fact that whatever's happening
that's really bad is very different
than the other things that tend to happen before.
So most of our experience doesn't remap us,
but those negative experiences
deploy high levels of norepinephrine,
high levels of acetylcholine, and really make,
so that whatever it is that we experience
in that bad episode is essentially cued up.
And so we're on the lookout for it.
And this has a number of negative effects,
but in terms of psychological and emotional effects,
but it is really a process designed to keep us safe.
The other ways in which we can learn more quickly
besides just making errors
is when something really surprises us.
And if we're positively surprised by something,
or we are just flooded with this molecule dopamine,
then there's a great opportunity for plasticity.
Dopamine is a molecule
that's almost always associated with pleasure
and with the accomplishment of a particular goal,
but it's really also a molecule of motivation.
It's a molecule that is released inside of us
when we think we're on the right path.
And it does have a capacity to increase neuroplasticity,
motivation, et cetera, it's released in response
to a number of natural behaviors,
just that help with the progression of ours
and other species, things like food, sex,
in some sense, social connection,
although that's more serotonin,
and serotonin doesn't have the same effects on plasticity,
quite the same, and we'll talk about a few later.
But dopamine is when we think we're on the right path
toward an external goal, a little bit is released,
and it tends to give us more motivation toward that goal.
I think everyone could stand to enhance the rate of learning
by doing the following.
Learn to attach dopamine in a subjective way
to this process of making errors,
because that's really combining two modes of plasticity
in ways that together can accelerate the plasticity.
So earlier I talked about making errors
and having a focus bout of learning
that includes making a lot of errors
inside of that learning bout,
that is going to be frustrating,
but the frustration itself is the cue,
and epinephrine will be very high under those conditions,
but if you can just subjectively associate that experience
with something good and that you want to continue
down that path as opposed to quitting
when you hit the point of frustration,
well, then you now start to create a synergy
between the dopamine that's released
when we subjectively think something is good
or tell ourselves something is good,
and that situation of making failures.
In other words, making failing repetitively,
provided we're engaged in a very specific set of behaviors
when we do it, as well as telling ourselves
that those failures are good for learning and good for us,
creates an outsized effect on the rate of plasticity.
It accelerates plasticity.
Now, some of you might be asking, and I get asked a lot,
well, how do I get dopamine to be released?
Can I just tell myself that something is good
when it's bad?
Well, actually, yes, believe it or not.
The thing about dopamine is it's highly subjective.
What's funny to one person
is not necessarily funny to the next,
so it has to have some sense of authenticity for you,
but if you really want to be learning the thing
that you're trying to learn,
that should be reason enough to tell yourself,
well, I'm frustrated,
but the frustration is the source of accelerated learning.
Dopamine is one of these incredible molecules
that both can be released according to things
that are hardwired in us to release dopamine.
Again, things like food, sex, warmth when we're cold,
cool environments when we're too warm.
It's that kind of pleasure molecule overall,
but it's also highly subjective
what releases dopamine in one person versus the next.
So everyone releases dopamine
in response to those very basic kind of behaviors
and activities,
but dopamine is also released
according to what we subjectively believe is good for us,
and that's what's so powerful about it.
In fact, a book that I highly recommend
if you want to read more about dopamine
is a book that, frankly, I wish I had written.
It's such a wonderful book.
It's called The Molecule of More,
and it really talks about dopamine
not just as a molecule associated with reward,
but a molecule associated with motivation and pursuit
and just how subjectively controlled dopamine can be.
So make lots of errors.
Tell yourself that those errors are important and good
for your overall learning goals.
So learn to attach dopamine,
meaning release dopamine in your brain
when you start to make errors.
Keep the bouts of learning relatively short
if you're an adult.
Younger people can probably engage
in more bouts of learning,
and it's probably one of the reasons
why they learn so much faster.
They can just pack so much more information
into the brains and nervous systems compared to adults.
You know, it's a little bit like, I'll use the example
of performance-enhancing drugs.
You know, some of those drugs
probably do enhance performance
at the level of increasing red blood cell count, et cetera,
but a lot of what those drugs do
is they allow athletes to recover faster
so they can just train more.
They allow them to do more work.
And so being a child is a little bit
like being in a performance-enhanced brain milieu.
Their brains are kind of unnatural, healthy neurochemicals
that afford them a lot more learning should they pursue it.
So this goes back to my advice for young people early on.
If you're young, what should you do?
Learn as much as you can
about as many things as you possibly can.
And I suggest specializing in something.
I guess I'm not in a position to give anyone direct advice,
but I would say hopefully by about age 30,
hopefully younger, you have some sense of what excites you
and try and get really good at that thing
provided it serves the world for better.
But that's all I'll say in terms of parenting advice.
It's not my place, but maybe sometime I'll have an episode
completely devoted to sort of youth and learning in youth.
But once you're attaching dopamine
to this process of making errors,
then I start getting lots of questions
that really are the right questions,
which are, you know, how often should I do this?
And when should I be doing this?
And at what time?
Well, I've talked a little bit about this
in previous episodes, but as long as we're now
kind of into the nitty gritty of tools and application,
each of us have some natural times throughout the day
when we are going to be much better
at tolerating these errors and much more focused
on what it is that we're trying to do.
Last episode was about focus,
but chances are that you can't focus as well at 4 p.m.
as you can at 10 a.m.
It differs for everybody depending on when you're sleeping
and your kind of natural chemistry and rhythms.
But find the time or times of day
when you naturally have the highest mental acuity.
And that's really when you want to engage
in these learning bouts.
And then get to the point where you're making errors
and then keep making errors for seven to 30 minutes.
Just keep making those errors and drill through it.
And you're almost seeking frustration.
And if you can find some pleasure in the frustration,
yes, that is a state that exists.
You have created the optimal neurochemical milieu
for learning that thing.
But then here's the beauty of it.
You also created the optimal milieu
for learning other things afterward.
If you leave that bout of,
I give the example of free throws,
or maybe it's playing tennis,
or maybe it's some other skill,
and you sit down to read a book,
your brain is in a heightened state
to learn and retain the information.
Because those chemicals don't get released
and then shut down.
You're creating a whole milieu,
an environment of these chemicals.
And the tale of how long these chemicals stay
sloshing around in your brain has too many factors
for me to put a hard number on it.
It's going to depend on transporters and enzymes
and all sorts of things.
But at least for an hour or so, I would say,
you're going to be in a state of heightened learning
and the ability to learn, not just the motor patterns,
but cognitive information, language information.
Maybe you go to therapy right after that
and you work on something in a very deliberate way
that you're trying to work on.
Maybe you don't go to therapy.
Maybe you do something else that's important to you.
Again, there are just a variety of examples I could give.
There are a number of things that allow us
to powerfully access the states of error
that are kind of surprising, but also kind of fun.
And these aren't, again, these aren't gimmicks.
These tap into these basic mechanisms of plasticity.
And the three that I'd like to talk about next
are balance, meaning the vestibular system,
as well as the two sides of what I call limbic friction
or autonomic arousal.
And if none of that makes sense,
I'm going to put a fine point on each one of those
and what it is and why it works
for opening up neuroplasticity.
Let's talk about limbic friction.
Now, limbic friction is not a term
you're going to find in the textbooks.
So if any of my colleagues are listening,
I want to repeat limbic friction.
I realize it's not something you're going to find
in any of the textbooks.
But it is an important principle
that captures a lot of information that is in textbooks,
both neurobiology and psychology,
and it has some really important implications.
Limbic friction is my attempt to give a name to something
that is more nuanced and mechanistic than stress.
Because typically when we hear about stress,
we think of heartbeat going too fast, breathing too fast,
sweating, and not being in a state that we want.
We're too alert and we want to be more calm.
And indeed, that's one condition
in which we have limbic friction,
meaning our limbic system is taking control
of a number of different aspects of our autonomic
or automatic biology.
And we are struggling to control that
through what we call top-down mechanisms.
We're trying to calm down in order to reduce
that level of arousal.
We're all familiar with this.
It's called the stress response.
However, there's another aspect of stress
that's just as important, which is when we're tired
and we're fatigued and we need to engage,
we need to be more alert than we are.
And so what I call limbic friction
is really designed to describe the fact
that when our autonomic nervous system
isn't where we want it,
meaning we're trying to be more alert
or we're trying to be less alert,
both of those feel stressful to people.
So the other way to put it is that the word stress
is not a very good word to describe
what most people experience as stressful
because it can either be being too tired
or being too alert.
Now, why am I bringing this up
in the discussion about neuroplasticity?
This is not a discussion about stress.
At some point, we will talk about stress
and tools to deal with stress.
But the reason I'm bringing this up
is that in order to access neuroplasticity,
you need these components of focus.
You need the component of attaching subjective reward.
You need to make errors, all this stuff.
And a lot of people find it difficult
to just get into the overall state to access those things.
So now there's a series of gates
that people are having a hard time accessing.
They're too tired and they can't focus, for instance.
Well, here's the beauty of it.
If you are too alert, meaning you're too anxious
and you want to calm down in order to learn better,
there are things that you can do.
The two that I've spoken about previously
on various podcasts,
and I'll just review them really quickly,
are the double inhale-exhale.
So inhaling twice through the nose
and exhaling once through the mouth.
This is not some yogic trick or some hack.
This is what's called a physiological psi.
It offloads carbon dioxide from the lungs.
It has a number of different effects.
These were described in textbooks
and dating back to the 30s.
And a number of laboratories have explored
the neural circuitry underlying
these so-called physiological psi.
That will calm you down faster than anything else
that I'm aware of.
The other thing is starting to remove your tunnel vision.
When you use tunnel vision, you're very focused.
That epinephrine is released by dilating your field of gaze,
so-called panoramic vision.
Great.
So now you can start to sort of move up and down
this level of autonomic arousal.
The key is you want to be in a state of arousal
that's ideally matched to the thing
that you're trying to perform or learn.
So if I'm really anxious
and I can't even pick up the basketball
or I feel like I'm shaking or my muscles are too tight,
I don't have that kind of looseness.
Now when I move like that,
it almost makes it look like I could throw a free throw,
but I miss 95% of the time,
unless the basket is very, very low
and I place it indirectly.
But I guess that's not a free throw, is it?
In any case, the point being that you want to be
in a state of alertness, but calm.
And so you need to have ways to calm yourself down
when you're too amped up.
But the other side of limbic friction is important too.
If you are too tired and you can't focus,
well then it's going to be impossible
to even get to the starting line, so to speak,
for engaging in neuroplasticity
through incremental learning, et cetera.
So in that case,
there are other methods that you can do to wake yourself up.
The best thing you should do is get a good night's sleep,
but that's not always possible
or use a NSDR, non-sleep deep rest protocol.
But if you've already done those things
or you're simply exhausted for whatever other reason,
then there are other things that I often get asked about,
like sure, a cup of coffee or super oxygenation breathing,
which means inhaling more than exhaling
on average in a breathing bout.
These are, now we're sort of getting toward the realm
of like how you could trick your nervous system
into waking up.
And if you bring more oxygen in
by making your inhales deeper and longer,
you will become more alert.
You'll start to actually deploy norepinephrine
if you breathe very fast.
So there are things that you can do to move up or down
this so-called autonomic arousal arc.
And what you want to ask before you undergo
any learning bout is how much limbic friction
am I experiencing?
Am I too alert and I want to be calmer
or am I too calm and too sleepy
and I want to be more alert?
You're going to need to engage in behaviors
that bring you to the starting line in order to learn.
There are other things that you can do
in order to then learn better and faster
besides incremental learning
and those center on the vestibular system.
And this may come as a surprise to some people,
but probably not as a surprise to some of you
whose professions or whose recreation
involves a lot of motor activity
and sort of what we call high dimensional skill activity,
not just running or cycling
or very linear activities like weightlifting,
but things that involve inversions
and a lot of lateral movement,
actual sports, jumping, diving, rolling,
these kinds of things, gymnastics type stuff.
Why the vestibular system to access neuroplasticity?
Well, we have a hardwired system for balance
and here's how it works in as simple terms
as I can possibly come up with.
As we move through space or even if we're stationary,
there are really three main planes of movement.
Now I realize some people are just listening to this
so I'm going to do this for both the folks
that are just listening
and for those of you that are watching on video.
So there are three main modes of movement
and it turns out that your brain doesn't really know
where your body is except when
through that proprioceptive feedback.
The main way it knows is through three planes of movement
that we call pitch, which is like nodding.
So if I nod like this, that's pitch.
Then there's yaw, which is side to side,
which is like shaking my head, no.
And then there's roll from side to side,
like when a puppy looks at you like, that kind of thing.
So pitch, yaw, and roll.
And the pilots out there will know
exactly what I'm talking about.
The brain knows the orientation and position
of your body relative to gravity,
depending on whether or not your brain and your head
actually is engaging more in pitch, yaw, or roll,
or some combination.
Because if I lean down like so,
or like so, it's a combination of pitch, yaw, and roll.
Now you might say like, what is going on here?
Well, we have these little things in our inner ear
called the semicircular canals.
Just like our eyes have two main functions,
one is to see objects in space,
and the other is to set our circadian clocks
through subconscious mechanisms,
our ears have two main roles.
One is to hear, right, to perceive sound waves
or take in sound waves for perception, so-called hearing.
And the other is balance or vestibular function.
So sitting in our ears are these semicircular canals,
and they're these little tubes where these little stones,
they're actually little bits of calcium,
roll back and forth like little marbles.
When we roll this way, they roll this way.
When we pitch, when we go from side to side,
there's some that sit flat like this,
and they go like marbles inside of a hula hoop.
And then we have roll.
There's some that are kind of at 45 degrees to those,
and it's kind of pitch, yaw, and roll.
So yeah, okay, great.
That sends signals to the rest of our brain and body
that tell us how to compensate
for shifts relative to gravity.
And I say, okay, wait,
I thought we were talking about plasticity,
but this is where it gets really, really cool.
Errors in vestibular motor sensory experience,
meaning when we are off balance and we have to compensate
by looking at, thinking about,
or responding to the world differently,
cause an area of our brain called the cerebellum,
it actually means mini brain,
and it looks like a little mini brain
like tucked below our cortex in the back,
cause the cerebellum to signal
some of these deeper brain centers
that release dopamine, norepinephrine, and acetylcholine.
And that's because these circuits in the inner ear,
et cetera, and the cerebellum,
they were designed to recalibrate our motor movements
when our relationship to gravity changes,
something fundamental to survival.
We can't afford to be falling down all the time
or missing things that we grabbed for,
or running in the wrong direction
when something is pursuing us.
These are hardwired circuits
that tap right into these chemical pathways.
And those chemical pathways are the gates to plasticity.
So I really want to spell this out clearly
cause I've given a lot of information today.
The first thing is how are you arriving
to the learning bout?
You need to make sure your level
of autonomic arousal is correct.
The ideal state is going to be clear, calm, and focused,
maybe a little bit more on the arousal level,
like heightened arousal.
So understand limbic friction,
understand that you can be too tired,
in which case you're going to need
to get yourself a little more alert,
or you can be too alert
and you're going to need to get yourself calmer.
That gets you to the starting line.
When you're at the starting line,
then you're going to go into a learning bout
and that's when you want to start making these errors, okay?
But what I'm saying is there's a layer in between
where if you are interested in using motor patterns
as a way to open up plasticity for all kinds of learning,
not just motor learning,
disrupting your vestibular motor relationship,
meaning, and I'll tell you how to do that in a moment,
can deploy or release neurochemicals in the brain
that place you into a state
that makes you much better at learning
and making errors much more pleasureful.
You're much more willing to do that.
Now, some of you are probably saying flow state, flow state.
Okay, I have friends that work on flow states
and who are involved in flow states
and trying to figure out what they are.
I have great respect for those people.
So I want to tip my hat to them, very important work.
But again, flow is an expression
of what you already know how to do.
It's not how you learn,
it's how you express what you've already learned.
So I want to be really clear about that.
It's been kind of presented as this super state
or highly desirable state,
but it's that we can all reach for.
That's the wrong rung to reach for
until you already know how to do the things
that I'm describing, in my opinion.
So the vestibular system,
if you can engage the vestibular system
and create some errors within the vestibular motor operations
that you're carrying out,
you create a neurochemical state
that then makes you very, very good
at learning very quickly.
Regardless of age.
So what would this look like?
Does this mean just doing inversions?
Well, does this mean doing yoga?
Maybe.
Does this mean taking corners faster on your road bike?
Does this mean,
let's say you always swim freestyle or breaststroke?
Does this mean swimming backstroke or butterfly?
It depends.
It depends, however,
on a very, very easy to understand parameter,
which is how regularly you perform
a particular motor behavior
and how novel a behavior is.
So the more novel that a behavior is
in terms of your relationship to gravity,
the more it will open up the opportunity for plasticity.
Have you ever seen somebody
who just jumped out of the plane for the first time
with a parachute?
I don't even want to think about what,
if you've just seen somebody who jumped out of a plane
for the first time without a parachute,
I would just hope the plane was on the ground.
But if you've seen somebody after that,
they are in this incredible state
because their body and brain
are flooded with all these neurochemicals
because it's very novel to them.
However, I've got friends from communities
that have done thousands upon thousands,
maybe tens of thousands of jumps,
and they're always alert and aware,
but it becomes pretty regular for them.
That's the point.
And they're not in this kind of buzzed out,
excited state afterwards because it's routine for them.
So the key is to bring novelty
to the vestibular motor experience.
The vestibular motor commands that you're performing.
And how do you do that?
Well, it's all about your orientation relative to gravity.
Now, I wouldn't want anyone to place themselves at risk.
So if you can't do handstands,
don't try and do them, freestanding and whatever.
If you're good at handstands,
guess how much plasticity doing a handstands
for half an hour is going to create for you?
Zero.
Your body is fully comfortable walking on your hands.
I see these people walking on your hands,
being upside down, being inverted.
Your Cirque du Soleil performers,
they're very comfortable there.
And there's zero learning, zero plasticity
because the failures and errors
and the relationship to gravity
are very typical for that individual.
Now, what this means is
that if we're going to use motor practices
to open up plasticity for learning,
not just those practices,
but maybe some cognitive skills
or other things in the period that follows,
we need to create a sense of novelty relative to gravity.
And that means being either in a new position
or slightly unstable.
Believe it or not, I don't want anyone injuring themselves,
but the sensation of falling or close to falling
signals the cerebellum to signal the deep brain centers
that release these neurochemicals
that something is very different
and we need to correct this error very, very fast.
Earlier, I was talking about high contingencies
for learning and you definitely don't want to make it
to kind of like either survive this or die kind of experience
I confess I occasionally look at these parkour videos
on YouTube and believe it or not,
a lot of those people have died.
The ones that do these ridiculous things
of hanging off of buildings and things,
I am not suggesting you do that, please don't do that.
What I'm talking about is finding safe ways
to explore the sensory motor vestibular space as we call it,
the relationship between those things.
So that could be through yoga.
If you're terrible at yoga,
there's more opportunity for you to learn
than somebody who's very skilled at yoga, for instance,
or gymnastics or handstands or on your road bike.
This is unfortunately what I don't want to name brands,
but stationary bikes where they give you
the visual experience of moving through space,
but you're not actually moving through physical space.
There's no vestibular feedback, it's all visual, right?
You're stationary on the bike, right?
So unless you're hanging off the bike in your living room,
like almost to the point you're tipping the bike,
you're not getting the actual vestibular motor
sensory mismatch.
That mismatch is the signal that deploys
dopamine epinephrine and these other things.
I don't care how excited or how much fun the ride was
or how much music you're playing that you love,
it's not the same situation as being
out of your normal relationship to the gravitational pull.
So the first gate is to arrive at learning
at the appropriate level of autonomic arousal.
Clear and focused is best,
but don't obsess over being right there.
It's okay to be a little anxious or a little bit tired.
Then you want to make errors.
We talked about that.
And this vestibular motor sensory relationship
is absolutely key if you want to get heightened
or accelerated plasticity.
And we talked about another feature,
which is setting a contingency.
If there's a reason, an important reason for you
to actually learn, even if you're making failures,
the learning will be accelerated.
So there's really four things
that you really need to do for plasticity as an adult.
And I would say that these also apply to young people.
And there's an interesting
kind of a thought experiment there as well,
which is if you look at children,
they are moving a lot in different dimensions.
They are sometimes hanging from trees
or I was a kind of a,
my sports were always things
where I tended to get hurt a lot, fall a lot.
So there's a skateboarding for me when I was younger.
So a lot of falling and rolling
and various things of that sort,
but whatever sport the kids are playing,
or even if they don't play a sport,
they tend to move in a lot of different relationships
to gravity, more dimensionality to their movements,
I should say, than adults.
And one of the questions that's always kind of been
in the back of my mind is,
as we age, we get less good at engaging in neuroplasticity.
Part of that is because as the brain ages,
there are certain changes to the way
that neurons are structured,
their molecular components, et cetera,
but it's kind of a self-amplifying,
or I should say, a self-degenerating,
self-degenerating cycle where as we get older,
we tend to get more linear and more regular
about the specific kinds of movement.
So we get on the treadmill or we take the walk,
or we just always go up the same stairs, et cetera,
and there's less opportunity typically
for engaging these relationships
to the gravitational pull
through the vestibular motor sensory convergence
that we talked about a moment ago.
And so you sort of have to wonder
whether or not the lack of plasticity
or the reduced plasticity in older individuals,
which includes me, would reflect the fact
that those chemicals aren't being deployed
because we're not engaging in certain behaviors,
as opposed to we can't engage in the behaviors
because the chemicals aren't being deployed.
Now, I have a feeling it's both.
These have a reciprocal relationship.
And I certainly, again, I don't think it would be wise
for anyone who doesn't have the muscle stabilizing skills
or the bone density, et cetera,
to start doing inversions and things of that sort.
That's not what I'm talking about here.
But it's interesting to think about
the sorts of exercise that we engage in.
We all know that getting the heart rate elevated
three to five times a week is really good for us,
for cardiovascular health.
I think there's a ton of data to support that now.
Some load-bearing exercise is important
for increasing bone density
and maintaining muscular strength
and proprioceptive feedback,
because I'm sure many of you know this,
but resistance exercise actually trains
the nerve to muscle connections
as much as it does the muscles themselves,
something I talked about at the beginning of the episode.
But I think most of us could stand to increase the degree
to which we engage this vestibular system in novel ways.
And that can be done quite safely
through a number of different mechanisms.
I'm not a surfer,
but people who do that sort of thing
are very familiar with orienting their body differently
according to the gravitational pull.
They're lying down, then they're standing up,
then they're turning, they're leaning their head.
So again, it's this pitch, yaw, roll thing.
And again, if you're very skilled at surfing,
you're actually not going to open up plasticity
just by surfing.
It's in the learning of these new relationships to gravity
that the windows for plasticity are enhanced.
So I want to make sure that I underscore the fact
that this vestibular thing that I've been describing
is a way to really accentuate plasticity.
It's tapping into an inborn biological mechanism
where the cerebellum has outputs
to these deep brain nuclei
associated with dopamine, acetylcholine, and norepinephrine.
You don't want to endanger yourself
in the course of pursuing these activities,
but it is a powerful mechanism.
That's kind of an amplifier on plasticity,
as is high contingency.
If you really need to learn conversational French
to save your relationship,
the chances are you're going to learn it.
There are limits, of course,
to the extent to which one can accentuate
or accelerate plasticity.
You know, the ceiling on this is not infinite.
Although we don't know how high it goes,
I think it's reasonable to say
that if someone put a gun to my head and said,
learn conversational French in the next 120 seconds,
that conversational French would be limited
probably to just one word,
probably the word we or something like that,
because I can't stuff in all the knowledge all at once.
I mean, I think that's the dream of brain machine interface
that one will be able to download a chip
into their hippocampus or cortex
or some other brain structure
that would allow them to download conversational French.
And someday we may get to that
as that capability may come about.
Right now, it does not exist,
nor is there a specific pill or chemical
that will allow you to download more information
more quickly.
This is the issue around nootropics
I've talked about before.
There are things that can increase focus,
mainly things that increase acetylcholine
and transmission through the nicotine system,
things that can increase dopamine, things like L-tyrosine.
Again, I'm not recommending these.
You need to heed the warnings on those bottles,
but they will increase these neurochemicals.
And there are, of course,
things that will increase epinephrine,
things like caffeine or some people,
because of prescription, take Adderall.
I'm, again, not suggesting people take any of these things.
In fact, today I focused almost exclusively
on behavioral tools and ways of structuring learning bouts
that will allow you to access more plasticity
regardless of age.
And they center around things that I'm sure
if you look around you, you'll see evidence for,
oh, incremental learning is powerful,
or, oh, the vestibular system
can open up opportunities for plasticity.
I'm sure that the yogis out there are all saying,
wait, this sounds exactly like yoga.
We're supposed to push to an edge and do these inversions
and do all those sorts of things.
Well, I want to be clear.
I never said anyone should do inversions.
I said that the vestibular system is a valuable portal
into some of these neurochemical states
that favor plasticity.
But not so seldom I hear from the yoga community,
and they will say things like,
much of what you're saying about how the brain works
or neuroplasticity has already been described
is embedded in yoga practices.
And I just want to be very clear.
I have tremendous respect for the yoga community
and the practices.
I've done yoga from time to time.
I find it challenging and valuable.
I'm not a regular practitioner.
But the problem with yoga
is exactly the same problem with science,
which is that yoga has a lot of practices
for which there are very specific names,
but no description or lending of understanding
about mechanism.
And science has a lot of mechanisms
and a lot of publications and papers
for which there's very little, if not no description
of tools and practices.
So my goal in not just today,
but in many ways throughout the course of the podcast
is to bridge the gaps between these various disciplines
in ways that are grounded mainly
to the fields of neuroscience and some related fields.
So yes, it's true that I look at things
mainly through the lens of science,
but that's not to say
that it exhaustively explains everything about anything,
nor is it to say that it's the only lens
through which one could look at
something like neuroplasticity.
So I just want to acknowledge that I have great respect
for all these different practices and communities.
And I think that indeed,
there are many cases in which
different communities and practices
have been aimed at targeting the same goals or outcomes.
Science and neuroscience
through an understanding of mechanism
can allow all of us
to gain a kind of common understanding
about what those practices are
and how to access things like neuroplasticity,
sleep, et cetera.
And I do believe, as I've said previously on this podcast,
that understanding mechanism
affords us a certain flexibility,
and I don't mean physical flexibility.
I mean a flexibility
when we can't engage in a particular behavior,
maybe we're injured
or maybe we're not in the right situation
to do a particular practice,
but by thinking about mechanism,
we can adapt our circumstances.
I've talked about this with sleep.
If you're rigidly attached to one protocol
of always looking at sunlight
at one particular time in the morning and in the evening,
that is not as valuable as understanding the mechanisms
of why you might look at sunlight
at one particular time versus another,
because that affords you a flexibility,
allows you to adapt,
and life is very dynamic,
and we don't have control
over all the external conditions all the time.
And so understanding mechanism
through the lens of neuroscience,
I do believe can be very powerful
because of course there are multiple ways to access dopamine.
There are multiple ways to adjust limbic friction.
It's not just through respiration.
Of course, there are many ways to do that.
And so my overall goal here in this episode
and with this podcast
is to give you some understanding of the mechanisms
and the insights into the underlying biology
that allow you to tailor
what these kind of foundational mechanisms are
to suit your particular learning needs.
So I really thank you for your time and attention today.
I've covered a lot of material.
I very much encourage questions in the comment section
if you're looking at this on YouTube,
and if you're not and you're listening to it
on Apple or Spotify,
please feel free to visit us over on the YouTube channel
and put your questions in the comment section.
I do read them.
This entire month is all about neuroplasticity.
There's a lot to cover,
but I'm very excited to delve deeper into this topic
as it relates to your particular interests.
Many of you have graciously asked
how you can help support the podcast.
The best way you can do that
is to subscribe to the YouTube channel
if you haven't done that already,
as well as to place questions in the comment section below
or comments if you'd like to give us feedback.
Also to subscribe on Apple and or Spotify,
and Apple allows you to leave a five-star review
if you believe we deserve a five-star review,
as well as leave comments about the podcast.
In addition, if you can suggest the podcast
to your friends, to your family members,
or anyone that you think might be able to use
and appreciate the information,
that's a terrific way to support us.
And of course, check out our sponsors
that we mentioned at the beginning.
That's a terrific way to support us as well.
Several times throughout today's episode,
as well as on previous episodes of the podcast,
I've talked about various supplements
that can be useful for enhancing sleep,
enhancing neuroplasticity, et cetera.
And again, I want to emphasize that I always think
that behavioral practices are the place to start.
I don't think supplements should ever be
the first line of entry for people looking
to enhance these aspects of their nervous system in life.
But for those of you that are interested in supplements
and the supplements that I take,
I'm pleased to announce that we partnered with Thorne,
T-H-O-R-N-E, and Thorne makes supplements
that are, in my opinion, of the very highest stringency
in terms of what's listed on the bottle
is actually what you'll find in the bottle.
This is a serious issue for the supplement industry,
as well as just the overall quality
of the materials they put into their supplements.
If you'd like to take a look at the supplements
that I take, as well as explore any of them for yourself,
you can go to Thorne.com slash U slash Huberman.
And if you look there, you'll see a number
of the different supplements that I take.
And if you decide to purchase any of them,
you'll get 20% off your order.
So that's Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E slash U slash Huberman
to see the supplements that I take
and to explore if any of them are right for you.
In the next episode of this podcast,
we're going to continue to explore neuroplasticity.
This, as you may recall, is the way that we go about things
here at the Huberman Lab Podcast,
which is to really drill deeply into a topic
for three or four or even five episodes
so that by the end of those episodes,
all of you have a very firm understanding
of how to apply the principles of neurobiology
to the specific practices and endeavors
that are most important to you.
So I very much thank you for your time and attention.
I know it's a lot of information
and it takes a bit of focus and attention
and certainly will trigger plasticity
to learn all this information.
I want to encourage you and just remind you
that you don't have to grasp it all at once,
that it is here archived.
And then if you want to return to the information,
it will still be here.
And that I most of all really appreciate
your interest in science.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.